KEP-3022: Tuning the number of domains on Pod Topology Spread (#3030)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/3022-min-domains-in-pod-topology-spread/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md)
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

With [Pod Topology Spread](/keps/sig-scheduling/895-pod-topology-spread), users can define the rule to spread pods across your cluster among failure-domains.

> And, we propose to add the parameter `minDomains` to limit the minimum number of domains in Pod Topology Spread.

Author: Thanks.

## Motivation

Pod Topology Spread has [`maxSkew` parameter](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/11a976c74e1358efccf251d4c7611d05ce27feb3/keps/sig-scheduling/895-pod-topology-spread#maxskew), which control the degree to which Pods may be unevenly distributed.

> But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.

Reviewer: Explain why this is a problem.

The main reason is that, if a domain has 0 nodes, the scheduler would still schedule on existing domains, without giving the cluster autoscaler a chance to provide a node for it.

Author: Okay, I'll try to be more specific.

### Goals

Users can define a minimum number of domains with `minDomains` parameter.

> When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,

Reviewer: This is not part of the Goal, this is part of the Design.

- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have matching Pods.
  i.e. scheduler filters Nodes on the domains that have matching Pods in the `Filter` phase.
- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`, scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have matching Pods.
  i.e. scheduler gives a high score to Nodes on the domains that don't have matching Pods in the `Score` phase.

> 

Author: Sure.

## Proposal

### User Story

I am using cluster autoscaler and I want to force spreading a deployment over at least 10 Nodes.

## Design Details

> 

Author: Sure, I'll move current Goals(contains technical details) to this part.

### API

New parameter called `MinDomains` is introduced.

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // MinDomains describes the minimum number of domains.
  // When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,

>   // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have matching Pods.

Reviewer: Uhm... rethinking a bit more about this, I think the semantics are off.

Let's say maxSkew=2 and there is only one node. I should be able to schedule 2 pods in that one node. The third pod should fail for force a scale up.

So we have to consider how many domains have pods. If it's less than minDomains, the global minimum is 0 https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-topology-spread-constraints/#spread-constraints-for-pods

Reviewer 2: Aldo is right. Currently (without `minDomains`), the semantics of "global minimum" literally indicates the minimum number of matching pods among all topology domains.

While with `minDomains`, the semantics is sort of dynamic:

- if the number of domains >= `minDomains`, "global minimum" stay the same as before
- if the number of domains < `minDomains`, "global minimum" is treated as 0

Author: Thanks for the clear explanation.

Okay, what I thought was 
- `maxSkew` does not affect the behavior of `minDomains`.
- `minDomains` tries to increase the number of domains as much as possible. So, if the number of domains < `minDomains`, it always tries to bind matching Pods to the domains that don't have any matching Pods.

But, I also think your opinion was better. I'll fix the description. 🙏

  //   i.e. scheduler filters Nodes on the domains that have matching Pods in the `Filter` phase.
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`, scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have matching Pods.
  //   i.e. scheduler gives a high score to Nodes on the domains that don't have matching Pods in the `Score` phase.
  // +optional

>   MinDomains int32

Reviewer: `*int32`

}
```

### How user stories are addressed

Users can set `MinDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule` to achieve it.

```yaml

> spec:

Reviewer 2: Can you give a full Deployment example to show the replicas?

Author: Sure.

  topologySpreadConstraints:

>     - minDomains: 10

Reviewer: MaxSkew is mandatory

>       topologyKey: node

Reviewer 2: let's use standard label: `kubernetes.io/hostname`

      whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
      labelSelector:
        matchLabels:
          foo: bar
```

With this, until 10 Pods have been created, scheduler schedules each Pod to a different Node.
This means that, for example, if there are only 5 Nodes that can be scheduled, only a maximum of 5 Pods will be created.

### Test Plan

To ensure this feature to be rolled out in high quality. Following tests are mandatory:

- **Unit Tests**: All core changes must be covered by unit tests.
- **Integration Tests / E2E Tests:** All user cases discussed in this KEP must
  be covered by either integration tests or e2e tests.
- **Benchmark Tests:** We can bear with slight performance overhead if users are
  using this feature, but it shouldn't impose penalty to users who are not using
  this feature. We will verify it by designing some benchmark tests.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha (v1.24):

> - [ ] Add new parameter `NinDomains` to `TopologySpreadConstraint` and future gating.

Reviewer: typos: `MinDomain` and `feature`

- [ ] Score extension point implementation.
- [ ] Filter extension point implementation.
- [ ] Unit test cases mentioned in the [Test Plan](#test-plan).

#### Beta (v1.25):

- [ ] This feature will be enabled by default as a Beta feature in v1.25.

> - [ ] Add necessary integration/end-to-end tests.

Reviewer: We usually require integration tests for Alpha. It would be great to have E2E tests that include a cluster autoscaler, but I'm not sure if that's possible.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--

> This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.

Reviewer: I guess we can leave this for the time when the KEP moves to `implementable`, but you can work on it already if you want.

But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.
In some cases, users want to force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains and, if there aren't enough already present, make the cluster-autoscaler provision them.

### Goals

- Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains.
- Users can use it as a mandatory requirement with `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.
- Users can use it as a best-efforts manner with `WhenUnsatisfiable=ScheduleAnyway`.

### Non-Goals

- Add new field to limit the maximum number of topology domains.

## Proposal

### User Story

I am using cluster autoscaler and I want to force spreading a deployment over at least 5 Nodes.

## Design Details

Users can define a minimum number of domains with `minDomains` parameter.

Pod Topology Spread has the semantics of "global minimum", which means the minimum number of pods that match the label selector in a topology domain.

> When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,

Reviewer 2: It's not mandatory to have matching pods on a domain (you can have 0 pods on a domain), so

```suggestion
When the number of domains is less than `minDomains`,
```

Reviewer: +1 you are right. Although would "the number of domains with matching nodes" be better?

Reviewer: well, ultimately the domains are defined by node labels. So I'm happy with any of those wordings.

Author: Understood. Thanks.
I'll change the wording to "the number of domains with matching topology keys".

> Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0; otherwise, "global minimum"
is equal to the number of matching pods on a domain.
```

Reviewer: the minimum number of matching pods on a domain.

As a result,

- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`, scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that have the less number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

> It is the optional parameter and the default value is 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`minDomains` is an optional parameter and the default value is 0.
```

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,
  // Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.
  // As a result,
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`,
  //   scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`,
  //   scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // Default value is 0.
  // +optional
  MinDomains *int32
}
```

### Implementation details

In Filter, filtering criteria is

```
('existing matching num' + 'if self-match (1 or 0)' - 'global min matching num') <= 'maxSkew'
```

- `existing matching num` denotes the number of current existing matching Pods on the domain.
- `if self-match` denotes if the labels of Pod is match with selector of the constraint.
- `global min matching num` denotes the minumun number of matching Pods.

For `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule`, Pod Topology Spread treats `global min matching num` as 0

> when the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`.

Reviewer 2: Ditto. Don't add the "that have matching Pods" clause.

```suggestion
when the number of domains is less than `minDomains`.
```

> when the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`.

Author: @alculquicondor 
> how do you calculate this? probably in PreFilter? Can it be done without increasing the complexity of the algorithm?

The current implementation calculates existing matching num in PreFilre.

We use existing matching num for calculation for filtering here.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/108c284a330a82ce1a1f80238e4f54bf5e8b045a/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/filtering.go#L322

So, I think the implementation will be like this. It's simple and can be implemented without increasing the complexity.

```go
		minMatchNum := paths[0].MatchNum // https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/108c284a330a82ce1a1f80238e4f54bf5e8b045a/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/filtering.go#L317
		if minMatchNum < *c.MinDomains {
			minMatchNum = 0
		}
```

> when the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`.

Reviewer: Sorry if I was not clear. If I ask a question, it means that it's not clear in the KEP, and thus it needs to be updated.

> when the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`.

Author: Okay. I'll update 🙇

And, in `preScoreState`, there is the `IgnoredNodes` field and Nodes in `preScoreState.IgnoredNodes` will literally be ignored and the score for those Nodes will be 0.

> For `whenUnsatisfiable: ScheduleAnyway`, Pod Topology Spread adds Nodes on the domains which have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew` to `preScoreState.IgnoredNodes`

Reviewer: How do you calculate which nodes to ignore?

Author: We calculate the number of matching pods here. We can use this `cnt` variable to judge if the Node is preferred or not.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/108c284a330a82ce1a1f80238e4f54bf5e8b045a/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L202-L208

But, now, I notice that we should not ignore the Node because even if the Node is not preferred from one constraint, the Node may be preferred from another constraint. In this case, the score of Node shouldn't be 0.
So, I'll fix this strategy. 🙇 

---

The scoring logic of Pod Topology Spread is not simple -- The higher the score from `Score` function, the lower will be the final score calculated by Normalized Score. Therefore, we can't use a simple strategy like adding 0 points [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/108c284a330a82ce1a1f80238e4f54bf5e8b045a/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L209) if the Node is not prefered for the constraint.

In `Score` function, scores for each constraint are calculated in this [function](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/108c284a330a82ce1a1f80238e4f54bf5e8b045a/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L293). 
Since the values of `MaxSkew` and `tpWeight` are fixed for each constraint, the larger `cnt`, the larger the score. And as mentioned, in Pod Topology Spread, the higher your score, the lower your final score will be. 

So, I think we need to calculate the global maximum matching num for each constraint in PreScore so that we can give non-preferred Node the lowest score finally among the scores calculated by that constraint.

@Huang-Wei What do you think about this logic? Please correct me if I'm understanding something incorrectly.

I know that my written English may be difficult to understand. If my explanation is not clear, please let me know. 🙇

Author: I found that I hadn't thought about it enough, so I revised the whole implementation detail of score phase. 🙏

when the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`.

The performance degradation is not expected on both Filter and Score because it is a small logic change.

### How user stories are addressed

Users can set `MinDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule` to achieve it.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx-deployment
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  replicas: 15
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        foo: bar
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: nginx
          image: nginx:1.14.2
          ports:
            - containerPort: 80
          topologySpreadConstraints:
            - maxSkew: 2
              minDomains: 5
              topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
              whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
              labelSelector:
                matchLabels:
                  foo: bar
```

> Until 10 Pods have been created, scheduler tries to schedule maximum two Pods per Node.

Reviewer 2: You'd better not mention how many (10 in this case) pods get scheduled b/c it quite depends on how many domains are present, and you didn't mention that.

I'd like to revise this deployment example to be 10 replicas, and assume there are 3 nodes in the cluster. So the first 6 pods will be scheduled, and the rest 4 pods can only be scheduled when 2 more nodes join the cluster (provisioned by CA for instance).

Author: Okay. fixed it.

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `MinDomainsInPodTopologySpread`

>   - Components depending on the feature gate: `kube-scheduler`

Reviewer 2: API server should also be involved, like: if the feature gate is disabled in API server, the field won't be persisted.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

A new field `minDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]` to limit
the minimum number of topology domains. It functions in a mandatory or best-efforts manner,
depending on the type of `WhenUnsatisfiable`.

## Motivation

Pod Topology Spread has [`maxSkew` parameter](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/11a976c74e1358efccf251d4c7611d05ce27feb3/keps/sig-scheduling/895-pod-topology-spread#maxskew), which control the degree to which Pods may be unevenly distributed.
But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.

> In some cases, users want to limit the number of domains for the cluster autoscaler and force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains.

Reviewer: `In some cases, users want to force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains and, if there aren't enough already present, make the cluster-autoscaler provision them.`

### Goals

- Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains.
- Users can use it as a mandatory requirement with `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.
- Users can use it as a best-efforts manner with `WhenUnsatisfiable=ScheduleAnyway`.

### Non-Goals

- Add new field to limit the maximum number of topology domains.

## Proposal

### User Story

I am using cluster autoscaler and I want to force spreading a deployment over at least 5 Nodes.

## Design Details

Users can define a minimum number of domains with `minDomains` parameter.

Pod Topology Spread has the semantics of "global minimum", which means the minimum number of pods that match the label selector in a topology domain.

When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,
Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.

> As the result,

Reviewer: `As a result`

- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`, scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

### API

New optional parameter called `MinDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]`.

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // When the number of domains that have matching Pods is less than `minDomains`,
  // Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.
  // As the result,
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`,
  //   scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`,
  //   scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // +optional

>   MinDomains *int32

Reviewer: What is the default value? Probably zero. Please specify.

Author: Yes, it's 0. 
Sure, I'll add the description.

}
```

> 

Reviewer: Can you include some implementation details?

Please don't add code to the KEP, but you can have some thoughts on which files/functions need to change and if we expect to have any performance degradation.

Author: Sure. I added an implementation detail section that explains how to implement this feature in a bit more detail.

### How user stories are addressed

Users can set `MinDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule` to achieve it.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx-deployment
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  replicas: 15
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: nginx
          image: nginx:1.14.2
          ports:
            - containerPort: 80
          topologySpreadConstraints:
            - maxSkew: 2
              minDomains: 5
              topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
              whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
              labelSelector:
                matchLabels:
                  foo: bar
```

> Until 10 Pods have been created, this flow is expected to repeats itself.

Reviewer: This is assuming that the cluster initially only has 0 or 1 node.

Author: True. I changed the explanation a bit. How about this?

1. Scheduler schedules two Pods per Node.
2. When the number of Nodes is insufficient, cluster autoscaler creates new Node to resolve this issue.

With the flow, this deployment is spread over at least 5 Nodes while protecting the constraints of `maxSkew`.

### Test Plan

To ensure this feature to be rolled out in high quality. Following tests are mandatory:

- **Unit Tests**: All core changes must be covered by unit tests.

> - **Integration Tests / E2E Tests:** All user cases discussed in this KEP must

Reviewer: Clarify that the tests would only ensure the correct behavior of the scheduler. The cluster autoscaler part would probably be out of scope.

Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name:

Reviewer: please fill this up

  - Components depending on the feature gate:

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions.
In terms of Stable versions, users can choose to opt-out by not setting the
`pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints.maxDomains` field.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> N/A.

Reviewer: Please answer this question.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> No.

Reviewer: There should be unit and integration

  - Components exposing the metric:
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

<!--
Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

### Scalability

> <!--

Reviewer: You can leave this for later, but consider working on it.

Author: Sure, I added some answers.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `MinDomainsInPodTopologySpread`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: `kube-scheduler`, `kube-apiserver`

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

> The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions.

Reviewer 3: Add sth like:

"The feature can be disabled by restarting kube-apiserver and kube-scheduler with feature-gate off".

In terms of Stable versions, users can choose to opt-out by not setting the
`pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints.minDomains` field.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

Scheduling of new Pods is affected.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> There should be unit and integration tests.

Reviewer 3: No - tests will be added.

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

A new field `minDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]` to limit
the minimum number of topology domains.
`minDomains` can be used only when `whenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.

## Motivation

Pod Topology Spread has [`maxSkew` parameter](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/11a976c74e1358efccf251d4c7611d05ce27feb3/keps/sig-scheduling/895-pod-topology-spread#maxskew), which control the degree to which Pods may be unevenly distributed.
But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.
In some cases, users want to force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains and, if there aren't enough already present, make the cluster-autoscaler provision them.

### Goals

> - Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains.
> - Users can use it as a mandatory requirement with `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains when using `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.
```

However, the global minimum is only calculated for the nodes that exist and match the node affinity. In other words, if a topology domain was scaled down to zero (for example, because of low utilization), this topology domain is unknown to the scheduler, thus it's not considered in the global minimum calculations.

The new `minDomains` field can help with this problem.

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,
Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0; otherwise, "global minimum"
is equal to the minimum number of matching pods on a domain.

As a result, when the number of domains is less than `minDomains`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

`minDomains` is an optional parameter and the default value is 0.

### API

New optional parameter called `MinDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]`.

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,
  // Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.

>   // As a result,

Reviewer: remove this line

  // As a result, when the number of domains is less than `minDomains`,
  // scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

>   // Default value is 0.

Reviewer: Add: When value is different than 0, WhenUnsatisfiable must be DoNotSchedule

        - maxSkew: 2
          minDomains: 5
          topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
          whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule
          labelSelector:
            matchLabels:
              foo: bar
```

Considering the case that we have 3 Nodes which can schedule Pods to.

6 Pods will be scheduled to that Nodes, and the rest 4 Pods can only be scheduled when 2 more Node join the cluster.

With the flow, this deployment will be spread over at least 5 Nodes while protecting the constraints of `maxSkew`.

### Test Plan

To ensure this feature to be rolled out in high quality. Following tests are mandatory:

- **Unit Tests**: All core changes must be covered by unit tests.
- **Integration Tests / E2E Tests:** Tests to ensure the behavior of this feature must
  be covered by either integration tests or e2e tests.
- **Benchmark Tests:** We can bear with slight performance overhead if users are
  using this feature, but it shouldn't impose penalty to users who are not using
  this feature. We will verify it by designing some benchmark tests.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha (v1.24):

- [ ] Add new parameter `MinDomains` to `TopologySpreadConstraint` and feature gating.

> - [ ] Score extension point implementation.

Reviewer: remove this line

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

> - [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
```

for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [ ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: `MinDomainsInPodTopologySpread`
  - Components depending on the feature gate: `kube-scheduler`, `kube-apiserver`

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions.
In terms of Stable versions, users can choose to opt-out by not setting the

> `pod.spec.topologySpreadConstraints.maxDomains` field.

Reviewer 4: nit: `minDomains`

Author: Thanks.

Pod Topology Spread can use `MinDomains` to determine the value of `global min matching num` when we calculate filtering criteria.

This change will not increase the complexity of filtering logic and the performance degradation is not expected.

**Scoring phase**

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable` equals to `ScheduleAnyway`,
Pod Topology Spread gives low scores to Nodes on the domains which have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

In Pod Topology Spread, the higher the score from Score, the lower will be the final score calculated by Normalized Score.
So, Pod Topology Spread should give low scores to non-preferred Nodes in Score.

In Score, the score for each constraint is evaluated, and the sum of those scores will be a Node score.

Basically, the score for each constraint is evaluated this way:

```
'existing matching num' * 'topology weight' + 'maxSkew' - 1
```

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable` equals to `ScheduleAnyway`,
Pod Topology Spread changes the evaluation way to this.

```

> 'existing matching num' * 'topology weight' * ('if existing matching num >= maxSkew (1 or 0)' + 1) + 'maxSkew' - 1

Author: Maybe we should have a discussion about the multiplier which is used if existing matching num >= maxSkew.
doubling it now, but there is no big reason. I just want score to be big if existing matching num >= maxSkew.

If we make it too large, it will affect all final score calculated in Normalized Score.

But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.
In some cases, users want to force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains and, if there aren't enough already present, make the cluster-autoscaler provision them.

### Goals

- Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains.
- Users can use it as a mandatory requirement with `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.
- Users can use it as a best-efforts manner with `WhenUnsatisfiable=ScheduleAnyway`.

### Non-Goals

- Add new field to limit the maximum number of topology domains.

## Proposal

### User Story

I am using cluster autoscaler and I want to force spreading a deployment over at least 5 Nodes.

## Design Details

Users can define a minimum number of domains with `minDomains` parameter.

Pod Topology Spread has the semantics of "global minimum", which means the minimum number of pods that match the label selector in a topology domain.

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,

> Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0; other wise, "gloval minimum"

Reviewer: "otherwise", "global"

is equal to the minimum number of matching pods on a domain.

> As a result,

Reviewer: For clarity, say again:

```
As a result, when the number of domains is less than `minDomains`
```

- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`, scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
- when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`, scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that have the less number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

`minDomains` is an optional parameter and the default value is 0.

### API

New optional parameter called `MinDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]`.

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,
  // Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.
  // As a result,
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`,
  //   scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`,
  //   scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // Default value is 0.
  // +optional
  MinDomains *int32
}
```

### Implementation details

> **Filtering phase**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**DoNotSchedule implementation**
```

In Filter of Pod Topology Spread, filtering criteria is

```
('existing matching num' + 'if self-match (1 or 0)' - 'global min matching num') <= 'maxSkew'
```

- `existing matching num` denotes the number of current existing matching Pods on the domain.
- `if self-match` denotes if the labels of Pod is match with selector of the constraint.
- `global min matching num` denotes the minumun number of matching Pods.

For `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule`, Pod Topology Spread treats `global min matching num` as 0
when the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`.

> In `preFilterState`, Pod Topology Spread has `Constraints` field which type is slice of internal `topologySpreadConstraint` struct.

Reviewer: I think the important question that the "implementation details" needs to answer is how to calculate the number of matching domains. If this is already calculated, say where it is already calculated and that we can compare that to `minDomains` to set `global min = 0`. Then the formula above applies directly.

Author: There was a slight misunderstanding and I didn't explain it well enough. Sorry.
I've added the explanation.

Reviewer: Keep in mind that readers of a KEP are not necessarily familiar with low level details in kube-scheduler (like production readiness reviewer). So we should try to keep the explanations as light as possible.

You can just say something like this:

We can calculate the number of matching domains in `PreFilter`, along with the calculation of `TpPairToMatchNum` (link here). This extra calculation doesn't increase the complexity of the preFilter logic.

Author: Sure, I made the description for Filter simpler as suggestion.

By introducing `MinDomains` field in `topologySpreadConstraint`,
Pod Topology Spread can use `MinDomains` to determine the value of `global min matching num` when we calculate filtering criteria.

This change will not increase the complexity of filtering logic and the performance degradation is not expected.

> **Scoring phase**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ScheduleAnyway implementation**
```

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable` equals to `ScheduleAnyway`,

> Pod Topology Spread gives low scores to Nodes on the domains which have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.

Reviewer: low or zero score? Clarify.

Also, it's unclear if you are talking about the current state of the scoring phase or the desired state after you implement the feature.

Author: > low or zero score? Clarify.

Okay. My way gives low score. It's not always zero.

> it's unclear if you are talking about the current state of the scoring phase or the desired state after you implement the feature.

Okay. I'll try to change my English wording 🙇

In Pod Topology Spread, the higher the score from Score, the lower will be the final score calculated by Normalized Score.

> So, Pod Topology Spread should give low scores to non-preferred Nodes in Score.

Reviewer: high scores?

Author: Yes.... 🤦‍♂️
Thanks for nice catch.

In Score, the score for each constraint is evaluated, and the sum of those scores will be a Node score.

Basically, the score for each constraint is evaluated this way:

```

> 'existing matching num' * 'topology weight' + 'maxSkew' - 1

Reviewer: In a way, this formula already gives the semantics that we want.

Ideally, we want to make the formula return a final normalized score of 0 if `existing matching num >= maxSkew` and `topology domains < minDomains` (assuming that there is only one constraint).

Given the way we do normalization, that might not be feasible.

Then we have 2 alternatives:
- Make the violated constraint dominate the score. Return `-1` and use that in Normalization to set a 0 final score.
- Give the violating constraint the highest unnormalized score possible, which is what you are proposing.

I think we might require some experiments with different alternatives and different node/pod configurations to see how the final scores behave. Can you try some? See this PR description as an example:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/91918#issue-634940699

Reviewer: It might be the case that after your experiments, we just decide to keep the formula and not change anything about scoring. As I said, the formula already gives some of the semantics we want. This feature is more important about `DoNotSchedule` behavior, after all.

Author: (Since there are two threads (here and [this thread](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3030#discussion_r761492956)) of similar topic, I'll reply to them together here.)
> An alternative is to make all the nodes that have existing matching num >= maxSkew (when number of domains is less than minDomains) have the max Score, so that the normalized score is potentially zero.
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3030#discussion_r761492956

When 
- there are `domainA` and `domainB`,
- and `domainA` has 5 Pods and `domainB` has 10 Pods, 
- and maxSkew = 1,
- and whenUnsatisfiable=ScheduleAnyway
- and the number of domains is less than minDomains,

I think it is better to give a lower final score to domainB (assuming that there is only one constraint). 
With my proposed way, we can give other high scores to each two domains in Score.

> Make the violated constraint dominate the score. Return -1 and use that in Normalization to set a 0 final score.

This way differs from my proposed way in that this way makes the violated constraint dominate the score as you said.

For example: 
| --  |  constraintA  | constraintB | constraintC |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
|  nodeA | violate | violate | - |
|  nodeB  | - | violate | violate |
| nodeC | violate | - | - |

violate: "existing matching Pod num on the domain which the node belongs to >= maxSkew" and "the number of domains < minDomains"

In this case, I think it is better to give a higher final score to nodeC than to nodeA and nodeB. 
With my proposed way, Pod Topology Spread gives twice score as usual when existing matching num >= maxSkew. And it is expected that nodeC will get a higher final score than nodeA and nodeB.

For these reasons, I prefer my proposed way.

What do you think about these cases? 

---

> Circling back on what I said earlier, you should prefer not to add code to the KEP. But a not-so-simple formula that has conditionals can be more readable as a code snippet. As long as you are not providing a significant diff, some code is ok in a KEP.
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3030#discussion_r761492956

Got it :)

--- 

> I think we might require some experiments with different alternatives and different node/pod configurations to see how the final scores behave. Can you try some? See this PR description as an example:

Sure. I'll try it lator 🙇

Reviewer: Yeah, your proposed idea is valid.

We need to compare it's behavior with the existing behavior. Do you agree that the existing behavior gives some of the semantics we want?

I'll review again after you share some numbers.

Author: > Do you agree that the existing behavior gives some of the semantics we want?

Yes, Pod Topology Spread is already giving a high score to Node with a low number of Pods. 
This is basically the same behavior that `minDomains` want to do.

---

> I think we might require some experiments with different alternatives and different node/pod configurations to see how the final scores behave. Can you try some? 

I examined how the final score changes depending on the multiplier for the violation in various situations.
(violate: "existing matching Pod num on the domain which the node belongs to >= maxSkew" and "the number of domains < minDomains")

**Prerequisite**

Create constraints for two domains (keys: `hostname` and `hostname2`) and both indicate the same as `kubernetes.io/hostname`.
`maxSkew` of `hostname` domain is always 1 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1 or 2.

current resources are:

```
nodes: node1, node2, node3 
- node1 has one pod
- node2 has two pods
- node3 has no pods
(All pods/nodes are same spec.)
```

**current behavior (`minDomains` is not supported) and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final score: [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

**current behavior (`minDomains` is not supported) and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 2**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.218875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 57} {node2 14} {node3 100}]
```

**the  `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain is 100 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 2**

In this case, 
- {the number of domains of  `hostname2`} < { `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain }
- {existing matching Pod num on node2} >= { `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain }

The score of "node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2" is affected.

2X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  8.437751649736402
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 72}{node2 9}  {node3 100}]
```

3X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  12.656627474604603
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [ {node1 80}{node2 6}{node3 100} ]
```

10X when viorate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  42.18875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 93} {node2 2} {node3 100}]
```

**the  `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain is 100 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1**

In this case, 
- {the number of domains of  `hostname2`} < { `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain }
- {existing matching Pod num on node1/node2} >= { `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain }

The score of "node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2" and "node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2" are affected.

2X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  6.437751649736401
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 55} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

3X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.828313737302301
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  9.656627474604601
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100} ]
```

10X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  16.094379124341003
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  32.18875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 51} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

Author: > Do you agree that the existing behavior gives some of the semantics we want?

Yes, Pod Topology Spread is already giving a high score to Node with a low number of Pods. 
This is basically the same behavior that `minDomains` want to do.

---

> I think we might require some experiments with different alternatives and different node/pod configurations to see how the final scores behave. Can you try some? 

I examined how the final score changes depending on the multiplier for the violation in various situations.
(violate: "existing matching Pod num on the domain which the node belongs to >= maxSkew" and "the number of domains < minDomains")

**Prerequisite**

Create constraints for two domains (keys: `hostname` and `hostname2`) and both indicate the same as `kubernetes.io/hostname`.
`maxSkew` of `hostname` domain is always 1 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1 or 2.

current resources are:

```
nodes: node1, node2, node3 
- node1 has one pod
- node2 has two pods
- node3 has no pods
(All pods/nodes are same spec.)
```

**current behavior (`minDomains` is not supported) and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final score: [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

**current behavior (`minDomains` is not supported) and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 2**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.218875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 57} {node2 14} {node3 100}]
```

**the  `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain is 100 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 2**

In this case, 
- {the number of domains of  `hostname2`} < { `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain }
- {existing matching Pod num on node2} >= { `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain }

The score of "node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2" is affected.

2X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  8.437751649736402
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 72}{node2 9}  {node3 100}]
```

3X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  12.656627474604603
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [ {node1 80}{node2 6}{node3 100} ]
```

10X when viorate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  42.18875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 93} {node2 2} {node3 100}]
```

**the  `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain is 100 and `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain is 1**

In this case, 
- {the number of domains of  `hostname2`} < { `minDomains` of `hostname2` domain }
- {existing matching Pod num on node1/node2} >= { `maxSkew` of `hostname2` domain }

The score of "node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2" and "node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2" are affected.

2X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  6.437751649736401
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 55} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

3X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.828313737302301
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  9.656627474604601
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100} ]
```

10X when violate:

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  16.094379124341003
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  32.18875824868201
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 51} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

Reviewer: It doesn't look like the final scores change much from the existing formula.

Can you get rid of the `hostname` constraint? I don't think it's helping see the difference.

Author: > Can you get rid of the hostname constraint? 

Sure. 🙇 

---

**current behavior (minDomains is not supported) and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 1**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1.6094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 66} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

**current behavior (minDomains is not supported) and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.218875824868201
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 75}{node2 25} {node3 100} ]
```

**the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2**

(The score of "node: node2 TopologyKey: hostname2" is affected.)

2X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  8.437751649736402
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 87}{node2 12} {node3 100} ]
```

3X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  12.656627474604603
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 91} {node2 8} {node3 100}]
```

10X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  42.18875824868201
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 97} {node2 2} {node3 100}]
```

**the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 1**

(The score of "node: node2 TopologyKey: hostname2" and "node: node1 TopologyKey: hostname2" are affected.)

2X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  6.437751649736401
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

3X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.828313737302301
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  9.656627474604601
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 55} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

10X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  16.094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  32.18875824868201
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
final scores:  [{node1 50} {node2 0}{node3 100} ]
```

Reviewer: Why is the non-normalized score of node 1 in `the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2` affected? Putting a pod there still satisfy the maxSkew, so I would expect it to remain the same as the original algorithm.

Other than that, we can see that the effect of the factor is to reduce the normalized score difference between the nodes under the skew vs the ones over the skew. I think this is good. I think 10X would be too much, but I would like the question above to be answered before commenting further.

Reviewer: Also, for `the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 1`, I would expect the normalized score of  node1 to go down as you increase the factor. Could you double check?

Author: > Why is the non-normalized score of node 1 in the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2 affected? 

Mmm, I think it was not affected in the above result. Did I miss something?

**current behavior (minDomains is not supported) and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2**

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.218875824868201
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 75}{node2 25} {node3 100} ]
```

**the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 2**

2X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  2.6094379124341005
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  8.437751649736402
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  1
final scores:  [{node1 87}{node2 12} {node3 100} ]
```

Only node2 score is affected. (4.218875824868201 → 8.437751649736402)

---

> Also, for the minDomains of hostname2 domain is 100 and maxSkew of hostname2 domain is 1, I would expect the normalized score of node1 to go down as you increase the factor. Could you double check?

The results don't seem to be wrong. 

2X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  3.2188758248682006
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  6.437751649736401
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node1:  100 * (6 + 0 - 3) / 6 = 50 
node2:  100 * (6 + 0 - 6) / 6 = 0 
node3:  100 * (6 + 0 - 0) / 6 = 100 
final scores:  [ {node1 50}{node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

3X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  4.828313737302301
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  9.656627474604601
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node1:  100 * (9 + 0 - 4) / 9 = 55 
node2:  100 * (9 + 0 - 9) / 9 = 0 
node3:  100 * (9 + 0 - 0) / 9 = 100 
final scores:  [{node1 55}{node2 0} {node3 100} ]
```

10X

```
node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  16.094379124341003
node: node2  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  32.18875824868201
node: node3  TopologyKey: hostname2  score:  0
node1:  100 * (32 + 0 - 16) / 32 = 50 
node2:  100 * (32 + 0 - 32) / 32 = 0 
node3:  100 * (32 + 0 - 0) / 32 = 100 
final scores:  [{node1 50} {node2 0} {node3 100}]
```

In the above`node: node1  TopologyKey: hostname1  score: XX`, XX is type float64.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/489fb9bee3f626b3eeb120a5af89ad8c2b2f1c20/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L209

But this score `XX` is converted to `int64` here.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/489fb9bee3f626b3eeb120a5af89ad8c2b2f1c20/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L212

When normalize, we use this criteria:

```
scores[i].Score = framework.MaxNodeScore * (maxScore + minScore - s) / maxScore
```

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/489fb9bee3f626b3eeb120a5af89ad8c2b2f1c20/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/scoring.go#L252

(`s`: the score of the node in the score phase.)

In this experiment, `minScore` is always 0.

```
scores[i].Score = framework.MaxNodeScore * (maxScore + 0 - s) / maxScore
↓
scores[i].Score = framework.MaxNodeScore * (maxScore - s) / maxScore
↓
scores[i].Score = framework.MaxNodeScore - s / maxScore
```

`s / maxScore` for node3 is always 100 because `s == maxScore`
`s / maxScore` for node1 **should be** always 50 because Node3's original score (in type float64) is twice as high as Node1's original score (in type float64). But, we convert scores for each Node to type `int` in score phase, so, the score for node1 is `55` when 3X.

Reviewer: > Mmm, I think it was not affected in the above result. Did I miss something?

You are right.... not sure what I was looking at.

Thanks for the extra analysis on the int/float conversions.

I would say a 2X factor is enough to strengthen the differentiation between valid and violating nodes. If you agree, could you update the doc?

Author: > I would say a 2X factor is enough to strengthen the differentiation between valid and violating nodes. If you agree, could you update the doc?

Yes, agree with that. The document has already been written about it as 2X. So, I only fixed the wording of some points.

```

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable` equals to `ScheduleAnyway`,
Pod Topology Spread changes the evaluation way to this.

```

> ('existing matching num' * 'topology weight' + 'maxSkew' - 1) * ('if existing matching num >= maxSkew (1 or 0)' + 1)

Author: Maybe we should have a discussion about the multiplier which is used if existing matching num >= maxSkew.
doubling it now, but there is no big reason. I just want score to be big if existing matching num >= maxSkew.

If we make it too large, it will affect all final score calculated in Normalized Score.

Reviewer: An alternative is to make all the nodes that have `existing matching num >= maxSkew` (when number of domains is less than minDomains) have the max Score, so that the normalized score is potentially zero. Although, given normalization, getting a zero normalized score also depends on the minimum score.

To cap, you would do:

```golang
min(maxSkew, existingMatchingNum) * topologyWeight + maxSkew - 1
```

Circling back on what I said earlier, you should prefer not to add code to the KEP. But a not-so-simple formula that has conditionals can be more readable as a code snippet. As long as you are not providing a significant diff, some code is ok in a KEP.

depending on the type of `WhenUnsatisfiable`.

## Motivation

Pod Topology Spread has [`maxSkew` parameter](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/11a976c74e1358efccf251d4c7611d05ce27feb3/keps/sig-scheduling/895-pod-topology-spread#maxskew), which control the degree to which Pods may be unevenly distributed.
But, there isn't a way to control the number of domains over which we should spread.
In some cases, users want to force spreading Pods over a minimum number of domains and, if there aren't enough already present, make the cluster-autoscaler provision them.

### Goals

- Users can specify `minDomains` to limit the number of domains.
- Users can use it as a mandatory requirement with `WhenUnsatisfiable=DoNotSchedule`.
- Users can use it as a best-efforts manner with `WhenUnsatisfiable=ScheduleAnyway`.

### Non-Goals

- Add new field to limit the maximum number of topology domains.

## Proposal

### User Story

I am using cluster autoscaler and I want to force spreading a deployment over at least 5 Nodes.

## Design Details

Users can define a minimum number of domains with `minDomains` parameter.

> Pod Topology Spread has the semantics of "global minimum", which means the minimum number of pods that match the label selector in a topology domain.

Reviewer: Add:
However, the global minimum is only calculated for the nodes that exist and match the node affinity. In other words, if a topology domain was scaled down to zero (for example, because of low utilization), this topology domain is unknown to the scheduler, thus it's not considered in the global minimum calculations.

The new `minDomains` field can help with this problem: [continues the existing text]

`minDomains` is an optional parameter and the default value is 0.

### API

New optional parameter called `MinDomains` is introduced to `PodSpec.TopologySpreadConstraint[*]`.

```go
type TopologySpreadConstraint struct {
......
  // When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,
  // Pod Topology Spread treats "global minimum" as 0.
  // As a result,
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `DoNotSchedule`,
  //   scheduler doesn't schedule a matching Pod to Nodes on the domains that have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // - when `whenUnsatisfiable` equals `ScheduleAnyway`,
  //   scheduler prefers Nodes on the domains that don't have the same number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
  // Default value is 0.
  // +optional
  MinDomains *int32
}
```

### Implementation details

**DoNotSchedule implementation**

In Filter of Pod Topology Spread, current filtering criteria is

```
('existing matching num' + 'if self-match (1 or 0)' - 'global min matching num') <= 'maxSkew'
```

- `existing matching num` denotes the number of current existing matching Pods on the domain.

> - `if self-match` denotes if the labels of Pod is match with selector of the constraint.

Reviewer: s/is match/matches

We can calculate the number of domains with matching topology keys in PreFilter, along with the calculation of [`TpPairToMatchNum`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0153febd9f0098d4b8d0d484927710eaf899ef40/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/filtering.go#L49).
This extra calculation doesn't increase the complexity of the preFilter logic.
Pod Topology Spread will be able to use the number of domains to determine the value of `global min matching num` when we calculate filtering criteria.

**ScheduleAnyway implementation**

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains` and `whenUnsatisfiable` equals to `ScheduleAnyway`,
Pod Topology Spread will give low scores to Nodes on the domains which have the same or more number of matching Pods as `maxSkew`.
(It is a low score, not always zero.)

In Pod Topology Spread, the higher the score from Score, the lower will be the final score calculated by Normalized Score.
So, Pod Topology Spread should give high scores to non-preferred Nodes in Score.

In Score, the score for each constraint is evaluated, and the sum of those scores will be a Node score.

> Basically, the score for each constraint is evaluated this way:

Reviewer: Remove the word `Basically`

```
'existing matching num' * 'topology weight' + 'maxSkew' - 1
```

When the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`,

> Pod Topology Spread doubles that score (so that final score will be a low score) if this criteria is met:

Reviewer: s/final/normalized

```
('existing matching num' + 'if self-match (1 or 0)' - 'global min matching num') > 'maxSkew'
```

- `existing matching num` denotes the number of current existing matching Pods on the domain.
- `if self-match` denotes if the labels of Pod is match with selector of the constraint.
- `global min matching num` denotes the minumun number of matching Pods.

Like preFilter, we need to calculate the number of domains with matching topology keys and the minimum number of matching Pods in preScore,
so that Pod Topology Spread can determine the evaluation way with them.

> This extra calculation may affect the performance of the preScore, because the current preScore only see Nodes which have passed the Filter.

Reviewer: Uhm.... we need to make sure to do it only if a constraint has minDomains set.

Is it really worth though? Since the original formula already gives a similar semantic, and because scoring is ignored by cluster-autoscaler, I now think we should leave scores unmodified.

@Huang-Wei, thoughts?

Author: Well.. I totally agree with "the original formula already gives a similar semantic". But, isn't it strange for users that there is no score change even after setting minDomains? 

> we need to make sure to do it only if a constraint has minDomains set.

Agree, we should do that if we go the way of changing scores.

Reviewer: Yes, we can specify in the documentation that it only applies to `DoNotSchedule`.

> But, isn't it strange for users that there is no score change even after setting minDomains?

The scores are not user visible regardless. The difference is so subtle that I don't think they would notice a difference in most scenarios even if there is a change.

WDYT @Huang-Wei ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, restrict it to `DoNotSchedule` adheres to our initial motivation; while investing efforts on tuning subtle scroring difference doesn't make a lot of sense.

Author: Okay. Understood.
I changed the doc to set the goal to DoNotSchedule only.

Reviewer: If it's not too much effort, add a summary of the discussion about DoNotSchedule in the "Alternatives" section. Explain what the proposal was, and why ultimately we decided it was not worth pursuing.

Reviewer: BTW, while it might feel disappointing that we are discarding the change, it was absolutely crucial that we explored the options. So thank you a lot for your effort.

Author: > add a summary of the discussion about DoNotSchedule in the "Alternatives" section. Explain what the proposal was, and why ultimately we decided it was not worth pursuing.

Sure. I added it to `Alternatives`. Could you please take a look 🙏 

> BTW..

happy to contribute to our best choice :)

```

- `existing matching num` denotes the number of current existing matching Pods on the domain.
- `if self-match` denotes if the labels of Pod is match with selector of the constraint.
- `global min matching num` denotes the minumun number of matching Pods.

For `whenUnsatisfiable: DoNotSchedule`, Pod Topology Spread will treat `global min matching num` as 0
when the number of domains with matching topology keys is less than `minDomains`.

In `preFilterState`, Pod Topology Spread has `Constraints` field which type is slice of internal `topologySpreadConstraint` struct.
This field has information about constraints for the Pod and new `MinDomains` field will be introduced in `topologySpreadConstraint` struct.

And, in `preFilterState`, Pod Topology Spread has `TpPairToMatchNum` field which is keyed with topologyPair, and valued with the number of matching pods.

In PreFilter, Pod Topology Spread lists all Nodes and initializes `TpPairToMatchNum` for each Node [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0153febd9f0098d4b8d0d484927710eaf899ef40/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/filtering.go#L226-L247).

> This `TpPairToMatchNum` field will be expanded to have the number of Nodes on the domain, and the number of Nodes on the domain can be counted [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0153febd9f0098d4b8d0d484927710eaf899ef40/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/podtopologyspread/filtering.go#L245) where Pod Topology Spread currently just initializes `TpPairToMatchNum`.

Reviewer: Note that node is just one type of domain. The domain could be zones (or something else), in which case we need to count the number of zones.
